In this code challenge, you will integrate identifying parts of speech using the Spacy library.
As you learned in the previous video, and calculating properties of state space trajectories.
As you learned a few videos before that in particular, you will import some text, identify lots of
nouns and adjectives, project the hidden states activations into their state space trajectories, and
then determine whether nouns or adjectives have longer trajectories.
That is a pretty interesting analysis to run, because both nouns and adjectives are not necessarily
very interpretable on their own.
You really need a context to make sense of them.
For example, adjectives modify nouns or pronouns, typically nouns that are close by, but at least
in the same sentence.
Now nouns, on the other hand, generally tie together information about subjects and objects and verbs,
and they're just important words in the sentence.
And as you are going through this these exercises, I would like you to make a prediction about whether
you think the state space trajectories will be longer for nouns or for adjectives.
Anyway, let's begin with exercise one.
It has often been the case that the first exercise in the code challenge is simple, and just involves
setting some things up.
However, this exercise here is actually pretty challenging and pretty involved to begin with.
Import the full text for the book Frankenstein from Gutenberg.org.
As usual, you can just copy the URL and import code from the solution or helper files.
Then you should tokenize this book using the GPT two tokenizer and also using the spacey tokenizer.
When you print out the number of tokens, you will get quite different results.
In fact, there's about a 20% inflation of GPT tokens compared to Spacey tokens.
And this is basically just because the Spacey library is tokenizing for words, whereas GPT will grab
subwords.
Now, on the one hand, this is not very surprising, and it's also just not terribly interesting.
You learned in the very beginning of this course that different tokenizers give different numbers of
tokens for the same text.
On the other hand, what we want to do here in this code challenge is identify nouns and adjectives
that we can trace through the model.
So if we are using the Spacy library to identify parts of speech, we cannot just map the tokens 1 to
1 onto the GPT model.
So what you will do here in exercise one is a similar approach to what I showed in the previous video.
In particular, use the GPT two tokenizer and then feed each of those individual tokens into the NLP
class instance in the Spacy library to extract the part of speech.
Now, you already know from the previous video that there will be some inconsistencies, maybe some
errors in here.
So to reduce the probability of errors, you should only use GPT tokens that are at least five characters
long and that are a complete word.
So how can you tell if a token is a complete word and not just a subword?
I will let you ponder that and come up with a solution.
But a hint is to think about how the tokenizer deals with spaces and whole words versus subwords.
Oh, and also you should ignore the first 1000 tokens in this text in the book.
The reason for that is that there's this whole Gutenberg preamble before the book actually starts,
and that includes sentences, but also like bibliographic information, table of contents, and so on.
So starting just after 1000 tokens basically just guarantees that you're going to grab text from the
book itself.
Anyway, while looping through the text and identifying tokens for parts of speech.
Create two batches, each of 150 sequences and 51 tokens long, corresponding to 40 tokens before each
target token and ten tokens thereafter.
And yet you'll create two batches, one for nouns and one for adjectives.
Now, this entire exercise is a little bit tricky, so I want to give you a bit of a hint for this part
here these two parts.
So my solution looks something like this.
So here I am looping over all of the tokens in the book starting from 1000.
And here I'm grabbing the text for each token.
And then here I have a filter with two criteria.
If the token is fewer than five characters, or if it's a subword and not a whole word, then we just
skip to the next token and we don't worry about any of the code that comes thereafter.
But if this token survives the filter.
Then I test whether this token corresponds to a noun, and if it is, then I insert that token plus
its neighboring context into this batch for nouns.
Or if it's an adjective, then same thing here.
Now obviously there is a lot more code in here that you have to fill in, but I hope this at least gives
you a feeling for how to organize the code.
Because we only want batches of 150 sequences, you can have a little bit of extra code at the bottom
here to break out of this for loop.
If there are enough sequences in both of these batches.
And finally, the last thing to do for exercise one is to show some of the examples of the nouns and
adjectives that your code It identifies, not printing out all 150 of them, but you can see some examples
here.
Overall, they look quite good, although there are some risks of mislabeling.
So for example the word dream.
Dream can be a noun or a verb.
And just from this isolated word here with no context, we actually don't know.
So you would have to see the word in context to accurately get the to label the part of speech.
So yeah, we can consider this to be a risk of adding non-systematic noise to the analyses.
Now, in principle, there are other and more accurate ways to deal with this.
For example, you could decode the entire context surrounding each of these tokens and then putting
that context as a full text into the Spacy function to confirm.
And, you know, that's the sort of thing you would want to do for a real research project or application.
But in the interest of not spending a ginormous amount of time on this one exercise, I'm going to say
that this approach is good enough, even if it's not perfect.
Okay, so that is quite some work to do for this exercise.
Now please pause the video and switch to code.
And now I will switch to Python and discuss my solution.
The libraries that we will use here I am.
Let's see here I'm importing the GPT two tokenizer.
I'm not actually importing the model.
We can do that later.
Here I'm getting the text and using GPT to tokenize it.
And then here I'm tokenizing it with the spacey tokenizer with this tokenizer, this trained model here.
Now this takes a while.
This is actually pretty fast, even though it generates more tokens.
This one takes I don't know, don't know, it's not too long, but it's many seconds.
Okay, so here I'm defining okay.
Yeah.
So that took 16 seconds.
Not so bad in the grand scheme of things.
Uh let's see.
So yeah.
And just to be clear, we're not actually using this.
I just wanted you to tokenize and print out the length, partly just to give you a little bit more experience
with working with this library.
Uh, and also, just so you can see one of the challenges of trying to integrate a parts of speech labeler
or categorizer with a language model.
Okay, here are the batch parameters.
Here I'm initializing these matrices.
So batch size by the two context uh window sizes plus one.
Of course the plus one is because the target token, either a verb or a noun or an adjective is going
to be in the middle of this.
Okay.
And of course, uh, we want these to be integers.
So these are counters that I'm initializing to zero.
So now let me walk you through this for loop here.
So this you've seen before this you saw in the screenshot a moment ago.
So here I am getting this little piece of text.
This is the characters that correspond to this particular token.
Uh, stripping it of the preceding spaces and then testing whether the number of characters is less
than five.
So if it's less than five, I use this Python keyword.
Continue.
When Python sees this word, continue after an if statement, for example, it ignores all of this text
here for the rest of the for loop, and then goes back to the next iteration of the for loop.
It is kind of confusingly, uh, named because, uh, it doesn't actually mean continue.
It means do not continue with the rest of the code.
But anyway, it doesn't matter.
Okay.
Yeah.
So, uh, remove that and, uh.
Yeah, just filter out any of these, uh, relatively short, uh, tokens.
And then here is where I look for sub words.
So the idea is that if this text if this token text does not start with a space, and if the next token
also does not start with a space, then this is most likely a subword.
If this were a real word, this token here, if this is a complete word on its own, it's not a subword
then it will start with a space likely not guaranteed.
And also the next token will start with a space again, likely, but not guaranteed.
So what does that mean?
That means that this condition here is going to exclude lots of perfectly valid nouns and adjectives.
For example, uh, I don't know if they're at the end of the sentence like the last word of the sentence.
If it's a complete word and the next token is a punctuation mark.
So but that's fine.
We can afford to filter out otherwise useful tokens because we are starting with so many.
You know, I want to get 300 tokens in total out of 100,000 tokens.
So it's really not going to be a problem.
Okay.
So that's the filter here.
I get the part of speech.
Again, it would kind of be a little bit more ideal to have a broader context.
But then you would have to make sure that you're aligning this particular token with this token.
Not impossible, just more work.
And I'm going to ignore that nuance here.
Okay.
So if this part of speech is a noun, then we go into this little bit of code here.
And basically I'm getting that token from that index in this context window and then increasing this
counter of sequences for nouns.
And same thing for if it's an adjective.
Yeah.
Same code here with different variable names.
So then I have this second embedded if statement here.
And the idea here is that as we are looping through all of these tokens, I do not want to continue
populating this matrix, this batch if I already have enough data.
So basically this is saying if we do not yet have enough data, then if it's a noun and it survives
these filters, then we can grab those data.
Otherwise if sequence I n is greater than batch size then this code never gets run.
Okay.
And then here I say if we have both batch size number of nouns and adjectives, then you can break out
of this for loop.
And that means we can see, uh, what is this index?
So in the end, we only went through, uh, 9000 out of 115,000 tokens.
So basically we searched through, uh, 9000 tokens or technically 8000 tokens, because we started
at 1000.
So we searched through 8000 tokens, and we found 150 tokens that were, uh, long enough, that were
full words and that were either a noun or an adjective.
Okay.
Uh, let's see.
So here I am, uh, just printing out some examples.
This is exactly the same as, uh, what you saw in the screenshot.
Uh, in the, uh, in the slides.
So again, you know, point, we would have to know from context.
We would have to see the context to know whether this is a verb.
Like I am pointing at someone, uh, or if this is a noun like the end of a pencil.
Well, that exercise was pretty intense.
But don't worry, this exercise now is going to be easy and straightforward.
Import GPT two large and move it to the GPU.
Then push the two batches of data that you created in the previous exercise.
Push those batches through the model and get all of the hidden states.
Of course, you're going to want to give the outputs of the model different variable names, and then
you can check the sizes of those hidden states tensors to make sure that they are the right size.
So in particular you should get 150 sequences, 51 tokens per sequence, and 1280 embeddings dimensions.
So that's it for exercise two.
I hope you find that this is a breath of fresh air and quite doable after the previous exercise.
On the other hand, if you really enjoyed the challenge of the previous exercise, then don't worry,
the next couple of exercises are going to become more difficult again anyway.
Now I will switch to code, import the model, push it to the GPU here, switch it to eval mode, and
then uh, yeah, run these two batches where we uh, here, uh, creating this variable number of layers
and then, yeah, checking the size of one of the hidden states here.
Now for exercise three.
This is another one of these cases where you can decide how challenging you want this to be for yourself.
The goal here is to create a data set that contains all of the target activation vectors for all the
layers, and then run a PCA, show a scree plot, and then project down to two dimensions.
It's.
The code here is not exactly the same as two videos ago, but it is fairly close, so you can certainly
copy and paste and modify.
Or you can start writing this code from scratch.
Now notice that this is a data set of size e by E.
E of course is the embeddings dimension.
And you already know that that is 1280.
The question is what is n going to be?
Now I want you to think about how big this matrix should be, based on what you know about the number
of layers and the batches.
So you should calculate n as a variable in the code to make sure that you have a good understanding
of the organization of the data matrix.
Okay.
You can then print out the sizes of the resulting lookup table and activations matrix that you see here.
Also remember from a couple of videos ago when I introduced the PCA trajectories, that analysis that
I included the sentence index in the lookup table.
And after filming that video, I decided to remove that indexing from this code challenge.
So that's why this lookup table only has two elements in the second dimension instead of three, like
what you saw before.
Okay, here you see the scree plot of these data.
I will make some interpretations about this result when I discuss my code.
But of course you should also generate this figure and think about what it means, and in particular
some implications it might have for the PCA trajectory plots, and also a bit different from two videos
ago where I ran.
So you remember I ran the PCA twice.
Once to extract 20 components and once with extracting only two components.
And then I mentioned that running the second time was redundant and I was just lazy.
Well, uh, also after recording that video, I decided that I felt a little bit embarrassed about being
that lazy of a coder.
So now in this exercise, what I did and what you should do is run the PCA only once and extract 20
dimensions so you can make the scree plot, but then you just want to store the first two dimensions.
So in the end, we're still only going to have the top two dimensions.
Even though you run the PCA, setting the number of components to be 20.
And then finally you can confirm the sizes of those matrices.
This is the same activations matrix as is up here, but you can confirm the size of this matrix as you
see here.
So it's going to be something this something will correspond to your variable n over here by two.
Because these are the top two principal components.
I hope you enjoy this exercise.
And I trust that you will find the right balance between copying and code, versus writing new code
to suit your level of experience and difficulty.
And now I will discuss some of the results before moving on.
This variable here num rows.
That is what I called n in the slides.
So how big is this matrix?
Well we have the number of sequences in each batch.
And then we have two batches.
And then we have all of that times each of the layers.
So there you go.
That's the formula for the number of rows in this data set.
And then I put in here and also initialize this lookup table.
Now we have this double for loop over here, which is basically the same as what you saw a couple of
videos ago.
So here I'm extracting this particular layer, this particular sequence and this particular token and
all of the vectors for that token.
And then of course I bring it back to the CPU, convert it to numpy and then squeeze out the extra dimensionalities.
Okay.
So that's for the nouns.
That's for the adjectives.
And then of course I have the information in the lookup table.
This tells me for each row which layer does it come from and which target does it correspond to.
So I'm using one for nouns and two for adjectives.
And of course, what I removed here was the initial line where I also stored the sequence index or in
the a couple of videos ago that was the sentence index.
Okay, so run that code.
Confirm the sizes.
And we see that it's 1100 and 11,001 hundred.
So that's the number of rows.
Okay so here I'm doing the PCA.
Here I run the PCA selecting for 20 components.
Fit it to the data.
Here I'm calculating a variable called scree.
This is the scree plot.
It is the percent explained variance.
And as I mentioned before this variable here is the proportion of variance explained, which is also
fine.
You can plot that, but I don't know.
It's often common to do it in percentage.
So I just multiply it by 100.
Now what do we make of these results here.
So remember two videos ago we saw that the top component explained about 62% of the variance, and then
the next one was ten.
And then I think it was around 8% after that.
Here the top two components are only explaining 40%, somewhere around even less than 40%.
But let's be judicious.
Let's let's be kind and round up to 40%.
So the top two components are accounting for only 40% of the variance of the data.
That's a pretty small amount of data.
And that does not it certainly does not invalidate the the rest of the method and the state space trajectories
and any calculations we made based on them.
But it is a pretty clear signal that we are missing most of the important variants in this data set,
and perhaps that is not surprising.
The last time we ran this a couple of videos ago, you know, we had these like really short, kind
of weird, overly simplistic sentences that were, yeah, there's only eight tokens in the entire sentence.
And we know that the first token always gives weird results.
So really like seven tokens.
So there just wasn't a whole lot of information that the model really needed to process.
Those sentences were also they were all just grammatically very simple.
They didn't talk about any like deep, meaningful context or anything like that.
On the other hand, here we are dealing with an actual text.
So the words that we get here have a much broader context.
We have bigger context windows and there's just a lot more complexity in the data.
So it's no surprise that the top two components explain a lot less variability.
Okay.
So this is just you know, these are issues that you will need to think about as a data scientist,
as an LM investigator.
So yeah, we will continue with this analysis, but I want you to be thinking about these kinds of issues
as you're working with real data.
Okay.
So then projecting down to 2D, this is literally the code that I was too lazy to write two videos ago.
So actually, let me, uh, let me just remove this and show you that here I'm getting 20 components
because I specified this input parameter here to be 20 components.
But all we want is the top two components.
So yeah, we take all of the activations, all the projections and just the top two components over
here.
We are now about halfway through the code challenge.
So I'm going to break the video here to encourage you to do all the things that you normally do.
When I split these videos in half.